What I want to do to wrap this video up.
Let's talk about how we proved all this stuff, right?
We just discovered some really wacky stuff.
We discovered that if you move close to the speed of like this, the rest factor is going to die like
time so that the proper time, as observed by the individual who is synonymous with the two events,
right?
His time is going to be long.
His time is going to be acting in a way that doesn't move as fast as the individual who is observing
that when he's not moving, OK.
In other words, their time is going to be larger than the individual.
Who is moving?
All right.
And this sounds weird.
So whenever you discover something new in physics, you want to experimentally verify it.
Now, at the time of the discovery in 1995, that was a monumental task.
You cannot do that very easily, right?
It was very difficult to take a clock and travel close to the speed of light and then compare the two
differences.
How do you do that?
And in fact, we were not able to verify this and everybody was like, Whoa, that's crazy nonsense.
Until 1941.
So in 1941, two individuals named Rossi and Hall.
They were able to exploit the natural clocks of unstable subatomic particles.
OK, so subatomic particles, you know, muons, so on and so forth.
Uh, they tend to decay after a set amount of time and we have this quantity known as Half-Life.
The time out, which half of the number of particles that are present decay, disappear or vanish,
whatever you want.
And if you take these guys, you can use that as a very accurate clock.
It's a very accurate, repeatable measurement.
OK, so what Rossy and Hall found, they said, Hey.
We got these muons, they're created in Earth's upper atmosphere.
These muon particles they created when cosmic rays or energy come down from outer space collide with
our atmospheric particles and.
You know, they come down close to the speed of light and they create these particles.
So if we're moving close to the speed of light, if we measure the decay rate when they're at rest and
compare it to those that are moving in, we should be able to pick up the time dilation effects.
OK.
So we found that, you know, by measuring at rest the half life, which I'm going to write as follows
the half life and I have a lot of board space, but we'll make do the Half-Life at rest.
Let me get my notes here is.
1.5 microseconds, very short.
Now, if we take the muons that are flying in, we're able to separate the different speeds and measure
the decay rate.
We should find that if we take this oh, the moving particle, the clock on the particle is moving.
That's the moving reference frame.
And it's also the reference frame for proper time because the birth of a subatomic particle and the
decay of subatomic particle in the reference frame that's moving happens at the same spot.
So according to us, we are this guy.
We are not the proper time.
So t one half.
We'll call that not.
It's going to equal this the gamma factor times Delta T.
One half the proper time.
OK, so if this moves at point eight, 66, the speed of light, we get a factor of two.
We could do a very quick calculation.
It should be two times one point five microseconds.
You should measure something like three microseconds.
OK.
Well, guess what, it is that measurement and they found within experimental error, this was indeed
true.
I don't know what speeds they actually use, but I just use this as an example.
So that was the first time we verified this weird, insane, crazy concept.
All right.
It's true.
Our conception of the time was literally different.
Our clocks float at a different rate.
OK?
We observed that the muon clock floats lower, right?
So what other kinds of experiments were done to to verify that we've done a lot?
We've done a lot.
The next one was done in 1971.
We verify time dilation by taking very fast jet planes in the United States Navy Observatory in Washington,
D.C., we used atomic clocks.
Which are very accurate, very precise.
And we flew a jet through all the way around the world, came back to the Naval Observatory and measured
the times.
And what we found was that.
The time difference between two.
Was 273.
Plus or minus seven nanoseconds?
And compared to the theory predicted here by Einstein, time dilation.
That predicted a time of two hundred and seventy five plus or minus 21 nanoseconds.
This is within the tolerance of this guy confirmed again.
Now, what if I told you that basically every day you pop in a car, you do an experiment like this
to verify time dilation because in fact you are, what am I talking about GPS?
Do you use GPS?
We used to have those TomTom's those big, bulky devices.
Now we use our smartphones.
But what I want to tell you is that.
Yes, indeed.
Your GPS Global Positioning System uses satellites and communicates from space down to Earth.
We need precise measurements.
So.
You know, that movie reference frame when it's tracking our position, if we do not account for relativistic
effects, we will be off.
My prediction of where something on the Earth, our global position will be off significantly in order
to get good results.
You must account for time dilation.
So every time you hop in your car and you go take a trip, use GPS.
You are verifying time relation.
You're doing an experiment that verify this.
This is a true fact.
This is reality.
So yes, time dilation is weird.
But it's true.
It's something that happens every day, it's something that you verify every single day and use.
Practically every single day.
So what do we find we found that.
Time dilation arises as a result of accepting the second postulate, a special relativity that it does
not matter what reference frame you measure light regardless of your reference frame.
As long as there's inertial reference frame, that's speed of light will be constant, it's going to
be see regardless of how how you measure it.
It's always going to be key.
So as a consequence of this fact, when you account for that, do some experiments.
What we find is that time dilates, OK.
The implied effect from it is known as time dilation, or that a moving clock is observed to move slow.
OK, so using this, we developed this relation here.
Delta T.
The time where the events are not synonymous is equal to this Lorenz factor times the proper time where
the events are synonymous.
And it gets dilated.
All right.
We get some weird effects.
We're going to observe rather study this a bit more by taking a look at the twin paradox.
Take a look at that symmetry.
I outline that weird event that both individuals think that the opposite thing is true and are both
right and the next video.
Hope you like it!
Stay tuned.